Now study the Bible together. Currently this church is reading some of Jesus' teachings, the Sermon on the Mount, from a part of the Bible called the Gospel according to Matthew. In this sermon, Jesus teaches what it means to live as the people of God's kingdom. Jesus first talked about the blessings of the people of the kingdom and taught that the people of the kingdom would become people who shine the light of God in the world as the salt of the earth and the light of the world. And last week we started talking about the law.

Now, let's read today's passage.

**Matthew 5:21-26**<br> 21 “You have heard that it was said to our ancestors, Do not murder, and whoever murders will be subject to judgment. 22 But I tell you, everyone who is angry with his brother or sister will be subject to judgment. Whoever insults his brother or sister, will be subject to the court. Whoever says, ‘You fool!’ will be subject to hellfire. 23 So if you are offering your gift on the altar, and there you remember that your brother or sister has something against you, 24 leave your gift there in front of the altar. First go and be reconciled with your brother or sister, and then come and offer your gift. 25 Reach a settlement quickly with your adversary while you’re on the way with him to the court, or your adversary will hand you over to the judge, and the judge to the officer, and you will be thrown into prison. 26 Truly I tell you, you will never get out of there until you have paid the last penny.

Last week, Hiroshi gave us an easy-to-understand message about the law. If you couldn't come last week, please take a look on Youtube. The passage I just read is a continuation from last week's passage. It said that Jesus came not to abolish the law, but to fulfill it. The law is teaching given by God so that God's people can live under God while loving each other.

What comes to your mind when you hear "law"? Is it something like a government's law, or a rule? If you are familiar with the Bible, you may think of the Ten Commandments. Everyday life involves being bounded by various rules. Some of them are good and some are bad, but in the abstract rules are necessary. Without the rules, you can't play soccer or baseball. Without rules, it would be fine to hit the ball with a baseball bat during a soccer game. Also, without rules society becomes disordered, and people can do whatever they want.

Some rules are check-box-type rules where it's fine to follow them exactly as written. For example, the key rule in soccer is "You can't touch the ball with your arms". But as long as you don't do that, you can use any part of your body—your legs, head, or chest. If you don't use your arms, you can check that box and say you have followed that rule.

But there are other rules where even if you follow them as stated, you still aren't really following the rule. For example, when I was a kid my family had a rule to turn off the TV when we were eating. The point was to value family time and make a time where we could properly talk. But if the family rule was stated positively just as, "Value family time", what would you have done when you were a kid? You'd look for loopholes. I think I'd say something like "No I can listen to people while I'm watching TV" as I continue to watch TV and not look at my family. That's why we needed rules saying "we don't do this / that" to accomplish the positive goal of valuing the family. And in this case, even supposing you followed the rule of turning off the TV and check that box, that alone doesn't mean you've really followed the rule. Because it doesn't mean anything that you don't watch TV if you instead play games on your phone or something.

In the days of Jesus, many Jews thought it was fine to follow God's law exactly as it was written, just checking the box. But Jesus says that the law is not that kind of thing. In last week's message, what was the last thing Jesus said?

**Matthew 5:20**<br> For I tell you, unless your righteousness surpasses that of the scribes and Pharisees, you will never get into the kingdom of heaven.

In other words, if you follow God's teachings in a checkbox manner and you think that's okay, you can't enter the kingdom of heaven. As residents of the kingdom of heaven, what is required of us is the righteousness that comes by faith in Jesus Christ. That's not a thing where you check a box, it's a righteousness that by faith actively goes and loves people.

From today's passage, I'm going to talk concretely abouthow Jesus knew God's law in a real way, and about what it is to live in a relationship with Jesus. The first thing concerns the law I read earlier, "Do not murder." Jesus first says this:

**Matthew 5:21**<br>You have heard that it was said to our ancestors, Do not murder, and whoever murders will be subject to judgment.

This "Do not murder" is actually from a different part of the Bible, and it's one of the Ten Commandments that God gave to Israel through Moses. However, the next part, "whoever murders will be subject to judgment" was not in the Bible but had been made through Jewish traditions. That's why Jesus says "it was said to our ancestors", not "it's written in Scripture".

Jesus purposely quoted this Jewish tradition because of there was this checkbox idea that "If you murder someone, you will be judged, but if you don't, you will not be judged." For the Pharisees and scribes of the time, them following the rule and checking the box "Do not murder" was more important to them than whatever reason God had when he taught them not to murder.

So why should we not murder? You might be thinking "That's obvious." Is it because of our instinct? Is it because it disturbs social order? Is it because it's the greatest violation of basic human rights? The Bible teaches us the ethics of God's love, which goes far beyond the ethics of this world. Genesis 9 states that we must not kill people because God created them in the his own image. We are not God. However, we were created by the amazing God of love as an image that shows his amazingness and love. However, mankind abandoned God's love and chose to live the selfish way of sin. And accordingly the image of God we have has also been damaged. Instead of loving others, we hate others, and instead of helping others, we hurt each other. However, through the Scripture, God teaches that his image still remains in us even though we're covered in sin.

What do you think about that? This is God's image. How much would the way we see the world change if we could correctly see each and every one of us as the image of God. Please look around. Each person in this room is made in the image of an amazing God. And each person you pass after you leave church, your family, your coworkers you see tomorrow—each of them is made in the image of God. When we see each person's value correctly, does treating people rightly mean only that we don't murder them? Jesus says no:

**Matthew 5:22**<br> But I tell you, everyone who is angry with his brother or sister will be subject to judgment. Whoever insults his brother or sister, will be subject to the court. Whoever says, ‘You fool!’ will be subject to hellfire.

If I disagree with what you say and say, "But I tell you," you'd probably be like "well who are you to tell me what to think?" But this is Jesus. Jesus, the King of the kingdom of heaven, who came from God, speaks to the people of the Kingdom with authority.

So what are these authoritative things Jesus is saying? First, I want to start with words that are difficult to understand. "Hellfire" ("Gehenna which is on fire") was a garbage dump in Jerusalem at that time where even the corpses of criminals were thrown away, and at that time it was used as a word for hell. At first glance, this sentence sounds like it's saying "for this sin there's this punishment", like anger =&gt; judgment, insulting someone =&gt; judgment in the Supreme Court, calling someone a fool =&gt; hell. But actually at the time there was a way of communicating by repetition, and so all three of these statements are talking about the same thing. Jesus repeats the same thing three times to elaborate on what he wants to communicate.

What Jesus is trying to communicate here is: "You think as long as you don't murder, you've followed God's law against murder and so you're a good person. But becoming angry with someone or saying something bad about someone and invalidating their existence or value is an attack against how they're made in the image of God in the same way that murder is."

That doesn't mean that all anger is wrong. In the Bible, there are scenes where Jesus gets angry. For example, in the temple where people should worship God, Jesus was angry at the exploitation of vulnerable people for money, and flipped over tables. However, Jesus' anger always came from his pure love for God and man. But what about our anger? Does it come from pure love like Jesus' did? As Jesus says, our anger is the kind that calls our brothers "stupid" or "fool". I get angry because I'm jealous of people or I blame them when things don't go how I want. We get angry not because we love people, but because we think that others who were created in the image of God are just things in our way.

God's heart in teaching us "Do not murder" is that we see people correctly as God's image and proactively love them. This is what love looks like that values, respects, protects, and tries to bring about growth of human life. In the Old Testament's Hebrew, the word "kill" means to destroy life. That is why killing was forbidden as the opposite of the proactive aspects of love which values life. That is why, if you only follow "Don't murder" to the letter and check that box, you won't understand the heart of God or the meaning of this law. But if you understand it correctly, you can see that not only killing, but also getting angry at or talking bad about others, is also against this law and is an attack on those who are created in the image of God. I think the most common examples around us are talking bad about people behind their backs and spreading gossip. It really is common to criticize or say something negative about someone when they're not around. And it's a terrible thing that really becomes a root cause of the destruction of churches and other communities. And Jesus says that God's judgment is on whoever attacks the image of God in humans. Because ultimately, it's an attack on God himself, who gave each of us his image. By choosing sin, not love, we damage the image of God in ourselves, and the image of God in those around us. And so one would expect that the judgment of God's wrath is on people like us. So how can we who should be judged, become people who proactively love others in accordance with God's heart of love?

It is only possible by believing in Jesus and looking to him. Even though people were angry at Jesus and mocked him, Jesus continued to love them. Betrayed his my closest friends, crucified, and in great suffering, he prayed, "Father, forgive them. They don't know what they are doing." Jesus is the one who became a man, and is the only image of God completely undamaged by sin. He graciously gave up his life for us. And that's how we know what love is. The Bible says:

**1 John 3:14-16**<br> 14 We know that we have passed from death to life because we love our brothers and sisters. The one who does not love remains in death. 15 Everyone who hates his brother or sister is a murderer, and you know that no murderer has eternal life residing in him. 16 This is how we have come to know love: He laid down his life for us. We should also lay down our lives for our brothers and sisters.

When we know the love of Jesus, for the first time we'll be able to in the truest sense cherish and love others. It's not checkbox-style love. I didn't get very angry with people today, check. I didn't call anyone "stupid" or "fool", check. I didn't murder anyone, check. That's just going to make you the same as the Jewish people Jesus was talking to. To follow the teachings of Jesus today is to believe in Jesus, receive His love, and with that love actively go and love those around you.

So concretely how does that love take shape in our lives? Jesus talks about the importance of reconciliation as one example.

**Matthew 5:23-26**<br> 23 So if you are offering your gift on the altar, and there you remember that your brother or sister has something against you, 24 leave your gift there in front of the altar. First go and be reconciled with your brother or sister, and then come and offer your gift. 25 Reach a settlement quickly with your adversary while you’re on the way with him to the court, or your adversary will hand you over to the judge, and the judge to the officer, and you will be thrown into prison. 26 Truly I tell you, you will never get out of there until you have paid the last penny.

Up until now has been about the emotion of anger toward another person, but here the situation changes a little. Both parables are about when the other person has something against you or is suing you. I didn't really understand why Jesus changed the circumstances with these parables, so I actually thought about it quite a bit. What Jesus is telling us here is, "If reconciliation is needed, take action immediately." However, if when you're feeling angry with someone, you choose to love and forgive them, there are times when you don't need to go out of your way to tell the other person "I was frustrated with such and such a thing you did, but I forgive you". But when the other person has something against you, in order to bring about reconciliation you need to be proactive and do something. And so that's why I think Jesus started talking about situations that require proactive reconciliation.

In these cases, you might be completely in the wrong, or maybe the other person is hurting you. In any case, here Jesus is telling us who believe in the gospel of love to go reconcile when reconciliation is required.

In the first story (**Matthew 5:23-26 on screen**), a person is going to make an offering at the altar. Many of the people who were following Jesus were from Galilee, and for them to make an offering at the altar in Jerusalem, it was a big deal—took about four days to walk to Jerusalem, and then another four days to come home. It's like if I walked from Nagoya to Kyoto and as I was getting ready for worship, I remembered, "Oh yeah, I made so-and-so mad." Jesus is telling us that in these times, to go make up with that person immediately.

The wrong reading of this passage is that you have to clean up your relationships before you come before God in worship. It also doesn't mean that relationships with other people are more important than your relationship with God. That would contradict the consistent message of Scripture.

True worship of God is more than just coming to church on Sundays and attend a worship service. It's also worshiping God to love the brothers and sisters around us as (made in) the image of God and put effort into reconciling with them. That's because by putting love into practice, we can show that we are receiving God's love and more broadly share it. Of course as Jesus says, "After reconciling, make sure to come back and offer your gift", gathering to worship is also important. But it's not a thing where as long as you do that, everything's all good. Living life of love for people, seeking reconciliation is how to live in worship of God.

Then Jesus tells the story of a person who is being sued and is heading to court (<strong>Matthew 5:25-26 on screen</strong>). I don't know how much experience you have with trials, but in society at that time, even small things were quickly ruled on by a district court. At that time, if you had any debt or damages you hadn't paid, you'd be put in prison and couldn't go out until family and friends came to pay it for you. One "penny" that Jesus mentions here is about 100 yen. What Jesus is trying to say here is, "Reconcile quickly before it's too late."

(<strong>Title slide</strong>) If I did something wrong, I was honestly really bad at acknowledging it afterwards and going to apologize to others. Making mistakes was embarrassing. To acknowledge and apologize for it, I had to take a look at that embarrassing self again. That is why I've lived using a strategy where I try to do that as little as possible and hope time will basically solve things. However, one of the most surprising things about working at this church was that other church staff and pastors were straightforward about acknowledging their mistakes and apologizing when something happened. They'd say like, "My attitude wasn't good, can you forgive me?" And so then I thought, They can acknowledge their mistakes and apologize because through the gospel they know God's love, and they know all their sin and shame is forgiven because of the cross of Jesus.

Something I realized then: I was trying to hide the things I was embarrassed about in myself rather than apologizing and reconciling with the other person because I valued my image more than my relationship with them. That's not the way of life of the people of the kingdom who are moved by the love of God. We have the overflowing love of the one who died for us. That's why we proactively love others and value relationships. Our pride gets in the way of that. However, because the brothers and sisters right in front of us are so valuable, created in the image of God, and a relationship of love with them is so valuable, we admit our mistakes, apologize, forgive others, and work toward reconciliation.

Sometimes, our efforts to reconcile don't get anywhere. Even if you apologize, sometimes the other person won't forgive you, or might cut off contact with you. What we should do is, in love try to live at peace with everyone, if possible and as far as it depends on us. Everything else we can entrust to God.

God's teachings are not checkboxes. God's teaching is the teaching of love. God has created us with love in his image. Through sin we do damage to the image of God. However, the God of love became Jesus Christ (???), died for us, and taught us love. And Christ rose from the dead and continues to pour the same love out on us. Because of this love, let's proactively love our brothers and sisters and on our own accord seek reconciliation.

**Communion** Now it's time for Communion. Communion is a time to focus on the sacrifice of Jesus' cross with the brothers and sisters around us. Sometimes I'm worried if God really loves me. God gives the answer through the cross. On the cross Jesus died to bear our sins, and three days later he was resurrected. The bread represents the body of Jesus broken on the cross, and the grape juice represents the shed blood. This is God's love shown to us. Communion is a time for Christians to believe in this Jesus Christ. We welcome non-Christians to come to worship. Please use this time as a time to think about God's love while staying at your seat. God waits for you to accept God's love in the best possible way by believing in Jesus Christ and being baptized. Christians, before I pray we'll have a short quiet time, so please meditate and take some time to be in the love of the cross of Jesus, which loved you from before you had ever done anything. After that, if I pray, take Communion from the tables in front and behind. Now, let's take some time to meditate on this before I pray.
